Add document on persistence. (#46)
OctopusDeploy/Architecture: OctopusServer/Persistence.md

# Space- and project-scoping of document stores

To access a child entity of a project, the document store implementation needs to know which project that entity belongs to in order to decide whether to try to find it in the database or a Git repository - and, if the latter, _which_ Git repository and branch.

Generally speaking, you're not likely to encounter this issue as we have aspects which extract `spaceId`, `projectId` and `gitRef` from HTTP request routes and inject them where appropriate.

You _are_ likely to encounter explicit knowledge of project scoping in the following scenarios:
1. Iterating over collections of projects;
1. During background task execution; and
1. In message bus event handlers (which implement `IEventuallyHandle<TEvent>`).

In these situations, you'll need to make it clear which space and project path you mean when you ask, for instance, for an `IDocumentStore<Runbook>` to fetch a runbook. To do that, take a dependency on an `IProjectScope` and structure your code like this:

```

> using (projectScope.Push(spaceId, projectPath))

Reviewer: This section probably needs a bit of a DANGER callout that it should really be an exceptional case and the implementer should understand what the dependency chain is around the using block due to the nature of modifying our (lifetime-scoped)  project context "singleton".
I'm actually thinking we should enforce the adding of comments each time this tool is used.

Author: Added an advisory note in e0606c4a24d9b31aa386d76073dbe1bb45bc07c3.

{
    var runbook = await runbookDocumentStore.GetAsync(runbookId, cancellationToken);
    runbook.DoTheThing();
}
```
You can compose a `ProjectPath` from either just a `ProjectId` (if a database-only project) or a `ProjectId` and `GitBranch` (if version-controlled).

It is not necessary to resolve a document store directly from a container, begin a child `ILifetimeScope` or do any other trickery to change the project scope - just use the existing `IDocumentStore<TDocument>` from within the `using (...)` block and it will use the correct project scope.

# FAQ

## I need to create/read/modify/delete a Foo entity. How should I do that?

Take a constructor-level dependency on an `IDocumentStore<Foo>`.

At present, if you modify something, you'll still need to call `await fooDocumentStore.UpdateAsync(foo, cancellationToken);` to tell the store that you've changed something. This requirement will go away (along with the `.Update(...)` and `.UpdateAsync(...)` methods). The safe assumption for now is that if those methods exist you should call them, and when they cease to exist everything will just continue to work.

> **IMPORTANT:** Please don't modify an entity if you don't want your changes persisted. At some point, persistence of any mutations will happen automatically, so even if you're not currently calling `.UpdateAsync(...)` the behaviour will soon change so that your changes will be picked up anyway.

Reviewer: I'd be interested to see a link out to this architectural discussion as moving away from explicit modifications has its own design discussions.

> # Persistence

Reviewer 2: 💡 Is there a natural place for this doco as a README.md right alongside the code, in https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/tree/master/source/Octopus.Core/Persistence?

Author: If we could have a symlink, I'd have it in both :)

I think there's at least a place for a README.md in the code linking to the `Persistence.md` page in this repository.

Author: (On my list before adding that is consolidating all the persistence-related files into a `Persistence` namespace - they're a bit spread out at the moment.

**TL;DR: To access an entity, take a constructor-level dependency on an `IDocumentStore<TDocument>`** where `TDocument` is the type of entity you need to access.

# Transactionality

Our API consumers have a not-unreasonable expectation that API calls they make either succeed or fail atomically. To this end, we have a [unit of work](https://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/unitOfWork.html) implementation which allows us to coordinate operations across multiple different types of transaction.

We generally have a single unit of work (UoW) per HTTP request. For background/long-running tasks, we have a UoW per logical operation.

NOTE: Our intention is to revisit our long-running `TaskController` pattern to decrease the need for long-lived, in-memory state, but that's outside the scope of this document.

Within a single unit of work, we might touch several different entity types from several different projects. Each of those projects will have
its own persistence settings:

- Some projects might be wholly in the database.
- Some projects might be in their own Git repository.
- Some projects might be in a Git monorepository shared with several other projects.

> All of this means that there is no one "transaction" to commit.

Reviewer 2: Great point. Another FAQ we might expect: Is the UoW atomic? i.e. What happens if one transaction successfully commits but another (in the same UoW) fails?

Author: Good point. I'll add a thing.

Author: Thing added in dd7df1464f253901473c18569b81f2fe17a5fabf.

We wrap a logical unit of work around this collection of (0-many) individual transactions. The unit of work is completed or abandoned automatically
via aspects (filters, middleware etc.) and should not need to be addressed directly during the normal course of operations.

# Custom queries

> The `IDocumentStore<TDocument>` interfaces exposes a `.Query()` method which returns an `IQueryable<TDocument>`. The expected approach to writing a custom query is to use a LINQ expression against that `IQueryable<T>`. We have implementations of `IQueryable<T>` for both SQL and Git.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `IDocumentStore<TDocument>` interface exposes a `.Query()` method which returns an `IQueryable<TDocument>`. The expected approach to writing a custom query is to use a LINQ expression against that `IQueryable<T>`. We have implementations of `IQueryable<T>` for both SQL and Git.
```

> Where a custom query is reused in multiple locations, we use an extension method class on the `IDocumentStore<TDocument>` interface. For example, we have a [reusable mechanism for loading a `Project` via its slug](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/blob/master/source/Octopus.Core/Features/Projects/ProjectDocumentStoreExtensionMethods.cs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where a custom query is reused in multiple locations, we use an extension method class on the `IDocumentStore<TDocument>` interface. For example, we have a [reusable mechanism for loading a `Project` via its slug](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/OctopusDeploy/blob/fb83083950a4bcac1d76ebcb6fc0b9250ba262b3/source/Octopus.Core/Features/Projects/ProjectDocumentStoreExtensionMethods.cs#L16).
```

# Space- and project-scoping of document stores

To access a child entity of a project, the document store implementation needs to know which project that entity belongs to in order to decide whether to try to find it in the database or a Git repository - and, if the latter, _which_ Git repository and branch.

Generally speaking, you're not likely to encounter this issue as we have aspects which extract `spaceId`, `projectId` and `gitRef` from HTTP request routes and inject them where appropriate.

You _are_ likely to encounter explicit knowledge of project scoping in the following scenarios:
1. Iterating over collections of projects;
1. During background task execution; and
1. In message bus event handlers (which implement `IEventuallyHandle<TEvent>`).

In these situations, you'll need to make it clear which space and project path you mean when you ask, for instance, for an `IDocumentStore<Runbook>` to fetch a runbook. To do that, take a dependency on an `IProjectScope` and structure your code like this:

```
using (projectScope.Push(spaceId, projectPath))
{
    var runbook = await runbookDocumentStore.GetAsync(runbookId, cancellationToken);
    runbook.DoTheThing();
}
```

> You can compose a `ProjectPath` from either just a `ProjectId` or a `ProjectId` and `GitBranch`.

Reviewer 2: Raises the question of: When can I/should I use "just a `ProjectId`", and which branch is assumed in that case?

Author: Good point. Addressed in 2d34ce0e5298a4027eeea62ca2b97e3a80badf69.
